I've been known to say that Ash Wednesday is one of the most important worship experiences for the people of God, but never to say that Ash Wednesday is one of the most fun worship experiences for the people of God.
It's hard to entice folks to come to Ash Wednesday service because if they don't know anything about it and they ask you about it, you said, well, I'm going to put some dust on your forehead and remind you that you came from God and you're going to die and you're going back to the earth and you're going back to God.
Nobody wants to hear that.
Yeah.
And then if you continue to explain Ash Wednesday, you say, well, you know, it's the day that we Methodists, we turn a little and we talk a little less about grace and a whole lot more about sin and transgression and our behavior toward God and toward others.
And we talk about all the things we have done to separate ourselves and to separate our
communities from God.
Raise your hand if you were running here for that today.
And then I tell them, but we have an opportunity to come back to God.
Someone once asked me, Wayne, well, where did I go?
I don't know.
You tell me.
I could never stand in this pulpit on Ash Wednesday and remember the Ash Wednesday that Ash Wednesday was made more real to me than ever before.
I'd been out with the flu and it was my first time back in the pulpit in a couple weeks because and I still wouldn't quite well but I wouldn't go miss Ash Wednesday.
And our associate pastor for worship and music, Reverend Robert Michael III, had been running around this whole campus, the whole city of downtown, ashing folks and telling them, from dust you came and to dust you shall return.
And people just sorta looking like, okay.
And then he'd say, repeat and believe the gospel.
And I imagine Mary that while y'all were walking around here, some people looked at you like they looked at John the Baptist in sackcloth and stinking a little bit and being a little strange.
Repent!
Because the thing of it is, is we all like to be encouraged.
We all like to be praised.
We all want the pat on the back because we've done the right thing.
But nobody wants to be called on the carpet.
No one wants to be held accountable for the ways in which we did not live to bring glory to God.
Nobody wants to be told that that thing you like to do is helping your neighbor fall.
And you've got to quit it.
Nobody wants to hear the preacher say, well, if you want to get right with God, then maybe you need to put down that Coca-Cola for 40 days and 40 nights.
Or worse, maybe you can't curse at her.
Maybe you must smile instead of scowling.
Maybe you must write your senator about the abominations that are going on in this nation.
Maybe you must stop.
Because it keeps giving you gout.
It keeps making you sick.
It keeps giving you illness.
And the only thing God ever asked from us is to be recipients of abundant life.
No, Ash Wednesday is not fun.
It is a time where we come together in what we call self-examining.
And we look at the ways in which we have honored God and the ways in which we have not honored God.
When our attitudes have been obstructive of the grace of God and other people's lives.
When our stubbornness has gotten in the way of how God has taught us to love each other.
When our politics have become more important than our propensity to praise the Lord.
When we find ourselves following people,
instead of the gospel.
But that's why we need Ash Wednesday.
That's why we should run to the church during the late season because we need this time with God.
We need this time to turn away from everything else that keeps us distracted and turn our focus to the One High God who comes to give us life and give it to us in abundance.
We need this time to say, is that really giving me the abundant life that Christ died for?
Does that give my neighbor the abundant life that Christ was resurrected for?
How is this drawing me nearer to God?
Or is my behavior separating me from God?
Ash Wednesday is an inventory.
All the people who say they follow Jesus should be sitting down with a piece of paper and a pen and listing all of the behaviors that we exhibit.
sitting down at the end of the day and reviewing our interactions with God's people and saying, yep, that honored God, ooh, maybe I got some work to do there.
And not just acknowledging
that we have failed to be in obedient church, that we have not done God's will, that we have broken God's law, that we have rebelled against God's love, that we have not heard the cry of the needy.
Recognition is not enough.
It's the behavioral change that God is at.
40 days and 40 nights to sit in the presence of God and to see where we can become the people who follow Jesus.
We're studying a book on Tuesday nights in Bible study called the Moral, what's it called?
The Moral Teachings of Jesus.
And in the book, the author, Dr. David Gushy, who's an ethics professor at one of our seminaries here in Atlanta, he says that we wouldn't have to worry about whether the church was full or empty if we were more worried about whether or not our behaviors reflected Jesus.
He says it's not about us getting on the same page.
It's about us.
believing and acting like we know Jesus.
He said there wouldn't be room in in in sanctuaries if the people of God actually looked like Jesus.
And this is not new.
The prophet Joel said, wake up!
He's talking to the preachers.
He's talking to the priests.
He's saying, wake up!
Blow the trumpet!
Sound the alarm!
Get everybody's attention!
If he were speaking to us today he would say, the people are going to hell in a hand basket.
And you aren't doing anything about it.
All right.
So gather them up.
That's what Latin is about.
Gather the people of God up, get their attention, remind them who they are and who they are.
Yes.
Remind them that God always has the last word.
But they must do their part.
And what is our part?
Loose the bonds of injustice.
Wayne Church folks don't like that word.
They don't like the word justice.
They don't like the word injustice.
And, you know, preachers get in a lot of trouble when they say the word justice in church, except that when translated correctly, the word righteousness actually means justice.
And if you put all the times that justice and righteousness are mentioned in the Bible, justice is mentioned in the Bible more than anything else.
So it must be important to God.
Loose the bonds of injustice.
Set the captive free.
Make the blind to see.
Declare the ear of the Lord's favor.
declare that abundant life is not something way over there after we die, but abundant life is available to us right here, right now, today.
Amen.
But we must return to God.
God doesn't want our spectacular displays.
God doesn't want our fake fast.
God cares not about your Coca-Cola unless it's killing you.
But God does care if your family is not getting along.
That's right.
To each.
God does care if our words and our actions cause broken relationships.
Yes.
God doesn't care whether it's purple or black or blue or red or yellow or green.
The pyramids does not care.
That's for us.
But God does care what spirit blows through this place.
David, the man after God's own heart, but we could also call David the chief sinner.
The chief sinner, David, after he went and stole somebody else's wife and then killed the man at the front line, he stole the she-but and killed her husband on the front lines because she got pregnant.
He says in Psalm 51, he says, have mercy on me, O God, according to your steadfast love, according to your abundant mercy, blot out my transgression.
What would happen if God blotted out our transgressions?
Would we be ready for that?
We might have some bumps in the world along the way, but maybe just maybe God would form us and make us into the people that create and sustain and share abundant life with all that we come in contact with.
David says, indeed, I'm a sinner.
I have sinned against you, God.
I have sinned against you alone.
I have done what is evil in your sight, and you are justified in whatever sentence you give me.
But then he says, creating me a clean heart.
and put a new and right spirit within me.
Do not cast me away.
Do not take away your Holy Spirit.
Restore to me the joy of your salvation and sustain in me a willing spirit.
Then open my lips.
so that my mouth shall declare your praise.
I can't tell you how many times I put dirt on a casket or on an urn or on the ground and said ashes to ashes, dust to dust.
Can't tell you how many times I've said that too early.
Too much.
Too hard.
And every single time, I wonder if we're all hearing it.
If we're all taking it in.
That every breath we take is a gift that no moment is promised.
And that every breath is an invitation to live and to share this abundant life that Christ has promised us.
Thank you Lord.
We can live in hell or we can live in heaven right now.
It's up to us.
It's our behavior that makes the difference.
Here's the good news.
It's time.
Yes.
The call to a holy lint said, get ready.
It's time to return to God.
Place your trust in God alone.
Return to the Lord.
Call for a fast.
Blow the trumpet.
Sound the alarm.
commit to turn from your old ways, do not arrive at Easter the same way you came to Ash Wednesday.
From dust you came and to dust you shall return.
Therefore repent.
and believe the gospel.
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, we pray.
Amen.